P8105 Final Project Proposal
================

**Group members:** Kristen King (*kk3154*), Harry Reyes (*hr2479*),
Lauren Richter (*lr2854*), Matthew Spotnitz (*mes2165*) **Tentative
Project Title:** Variation in kidney transplantation center practices
and patient characteristics

**Motivation for this project:** Kidney transplantation is the preferred
treatment for End Stage Kidney Disease (ESKD). Nonetheless, due to a
severe donor organ shortage, only 22,393 out of more than 785,000
patients with ESKD received kidney transplants in the United States (US)
in 2018.<sup>1</sup> Given the limited supply, kidney transplant centers
can be very selective in who qualifies as a kidney transplant candidate.
Transplant centers and surgeons often make subjective decisions
regarding which deceased donor kidneys are acceptable for transplant in
a given patient. This process can lack transparency and impact whether a
patient receives a kidney transplant prior to dying or removal from the
waiting list due to severity of illness. Accordingly, large practice
variation is possible among the 200+ kidney transplant centers across
the US. While center-level summary data on transplants and waitlist
candidates are publicly available, this information is primarily
presented as individualized snapshot reports that do not lend themselves
to direct comparison across sites over time. Given that patients may
choose where to waitlist, our aim is to analyze data comparing
transplantation center practices and develop a dashboard to present
these findings to the public.

**Intended Final Products:** We will produce a webpage with a dashboard
that presents data visualizations comparing kidney transplantation
centers and examining organ offer practices over time.

**Anticipated data sources:** The Scientific Registry of Transplant
Recipients (SRTR) takes national registry data on all organ donors,
transplant candidates, and transplant recipients in the US to produce
biannual [Program-Specific
Reports](https://www.srtr.org/reports/program-specific-reports/) (PSR).
Our project will utilize center-level data on waitlisted patients and
patients in receipt of transplants, aggregated demographics, transplant
outcomes, and organ offer acceptance practices. The PSR data is archived
and publicly available for download in Excel format from the SRTR
website with drop-down menus for organ and time period. These reports
date back to July 2012 with offer acceptance data available starting
July 2017. There are 238 rows of transplant center data in the most
recent data file, organized across many different sheets by topic, each
with tens to hundreds of columns. We may also scrape “current rating”
information about transplant programs that is only available on the web,
including ratings (scale from 1 to 5) of 1-year kidney survival and
chances of getting a deceased donor transplant faster.

**Planned analyses / visualizations / coding challenges:**

-   Summaries
-   Exploratory statistical analyses
-   Visualizations
-   Potential challenges

**Planned timeline**

**References**  
1. United States Renal Data System. 2020 USRDS Annual Data Report:
Epidemiology of kidney disease in the United States. National Institutes
of Health, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, Bethesda, MD, 2020.
